.TH SENTINELBOX 1 "May 2026" "SentinelBox 1.4" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
sentinelbox \- semantic-aware, rootless sandbox for secure AI code execution

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sentinelbox
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] \-\- \fICOMMAND\fR [\fIARGS\fR...]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B sentinelbox
is a specialized isolation engine designed for executing untrusted, AI-generated code. It bridges the "semantic gap" between low-level kernel enforcement and high-level AI reasoning by providing actionable natural-language feedback via the Model Context Protocol (MCP).

The sandbox leverages several Linux Kernel subsystems for multi-layered isolation:
.IP \(bu 2
\fBNamespaces\fR: Isolates PID, Mount, Network, IPC, UTS, and User views. It effectively "traps" the process in a private environment where it cannot see or interact with the host system.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBSeccomp-BPF (User Notification)\fR: Intercepts system calls. While traditional seccomp only kills or returns errors, SentinelBox uses \fISECCOMP_RET_USER_NOTIF\fR to redirect violations to a dedicated monitor process.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBOverlayFS & tmpfs\fR: Creates an ephemeral writable layer. Any files written by the sandboxed process are stored in RAM (\fBtmpfs\fR) and destroyed upon exit, ensuring sub-20ms environment resets.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBCgroup v2\fR: Implements hard resource caps (CPU, Memory, PIDs).

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-profile=\fINAME\fR
Load security constraints from \fIprofiles/NAME.json\fR. Standard profiles:
.RS
.IP \fBstrict\fR 12
Maximum isolation; no network access; minimal whitelist.
.IP \fBdatascience\fR 12
High memory limits; specific syscalls for NumPy/Pandas.
.IP \fBweb\fR 12
Enables restricted outbound TCP connections.
.RE
.TP
.BR \-D ", " \-\-profile\-dir=\fIDIR\fR
Directory containing profile JSON files. Default: \fI./profiles\fR.
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-rootfs=\fIPATH\fR
\fBRequired.\fR The read-only base image for the sandbox. Usually a busybox or alpine directory.
.TP
.BR \-m ", " \-\-monitor=\fIPATH\fR
Path to the \fBsentinelbox-monitor\fR Rust binary.
.TP
.BR \-C ", " \-\-cgroup\-parent=\fIPATH\fR
Override the parent cgroup node. Vital for rootless environments to point at a delegated user subtree.
.TP
.BR \-N ", " \-\-no\-monitor
Bypass the Rust monitor. Syscall actions set to \fBNOTIFY\fR will fall back to returning \fBERRNO (EPERM)\fR.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Enable diagnostic logs on \fIstderr\fR.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Display help and exit.

.SH COMMAND EXECUTION
The double-dash (\fB\-\-\fR) separator is \fBmandatory\fR. Everything following the separator is treated as the command to execute inside the sandbox.

.SH PROFILE JSON FORMAT
Profiles are structured as follows:
.TP
\fBdefault_action\fR (String)
One of: \fBALLOW\fR, \fBERRNO\fR, \fBNOTIFY\fR, or \fBKILL\fR.
.TP
\fBsyscall_rules\fR (Array)
Objects with: \fIname\fR, \fIaction\fR, and optional \fIerrno\fR.
.TP
\fBresources\fR (Object)
\fImem_limit_bytes\fR (Integer), \fIcpu_max_quota\fR (Integer in microseconds).
.TP
\fBnetwork\fR (Object)
\fIallow_network\fR (Boolean), \fIallow_dns\fR (Boolean).

.SH SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS
.IP \(bu 2
\fBRootless Security\fR: SentinelBox uses \fICLONE_NEWUSER\fR. Inside the sandbox, the user appears as \fBroot\fR (UID 0), but on the host, it retains the privileges of the original unprivileged user.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBCapabilities\fR: The engine drops all "dangerous" capabilities (e.g., \fBCAP_SYS_ADMIN\fR) before execution.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBNetwork Isolation\fR: By default, the network stack is unshared (\fICLONE_NEWNET\fR), leaving the process with only a loopback interface.

.SH INTERNALS: THE FEEDBACK LOOP
1. The kernel pauses the violating process.
2. \fBsentinelbox-monitor\fR (Rust) receives the syscall context via \fIioctl\fR.
3. The event is logged to \fIsentinelbox.db\fR with high-level metadata.
4. The \fBMCP Server\fR reads the DB and translates the block into natural language for the AI Agent.

.SH EXIT CODES
.TP
.B 0
Command succeeded.
.TP
.B 127
Sandbox setup failed (e.g., namespace creation, mount error).
.TP
.B 137
OOM Kill or SIGKILL termination.
.TP
\fB[Other]\fR
The exit code of the executed command.

.SH FILES
.TP
\fIsentinelbox.db\fR
The SQLite WAL database for audit logs.
.TP
\fIprofiles/\fR
Default directory for security policies.

.SH BUGS
Cgroup v2 enforcement may fail in nested Docker environments. The system will gracefully fall back to reporting global host telemetry.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR seccomp (2),
.BR unshare (2),
.BR pivot_root (2),
.BR cgroups (7),
.BR overlayfs (5)

.SH AUTHORS
SentinelBox Team \- UNIX System Programming Final Project (2026)